This video is brought to you by brilliant problem solving based website and with
a hands on approach,
improve your stem skills while having a great time learning at
brilliant.org/biographics more on them a bit.
No one has been greater botanist zoologist. No one has written more books,
more correctly, more methodically from personal experience.
No one has more completely changed a whole science and started
a new epoch.
Those were the words used to describe Carl Lenas as written by,
well, Carl Le, if nothing else,
this man was certainly not shy about floundering his accomplishments,
but he might not be wrong.
Colon air studied botany his entire life and became one of the most prominent
experts on the subject. A prolific writer.
He completely revolutionized taxonomy,
which is the science of naming and classifying biological organisms.
He named and IED around 16,000 species.
The Marky left on taxonomy is still obvious today.
If you look up the scientific name of any of the plants he described,
their author is so ubiquitous that he is de noted simply by the letter
L.
Colones was born on may the 23rd,
1707 in rash to tiny village in the Southern province of small lands in Southern
Sweden. He was the eldest of five children to Neil's Ingamar and Aire.
And Christina brought a Sonya.
His father was a church minister and an amateur botanist who believed in the
importance of a good education. Ever since Carl was little boy,
he and his father would take trips through the garden where Neils taught him
everything that he knew about plants. By age five,
Carl already had his own garden, even as a young child.
And he enjoyed remembering the names of every plant.
And we're not talking about their common names here,
but the long complicated ones that are in Latin this however did not
pressed his teachers at school.
Botany was not considered a proper subject like mathematics or theology. Yet.
Carl always prioritized his botanical studies over the other subjects because of
this. He was always a middling student.
He wasn't considered good enough for college by his educators. Fortunately,
there was one exception, a teacher named Johan Rothman.
I teaching he was also a medical doctor and recognized that Carl's passion for
Barany could parlay very well into a career in medicine.
He not only encouraged Nils to put his son on this path,
but also took Carl to his home and tutored him and physiology and anatomy in
1727,
the 21 year old Aire enrolled at the university of London to study medicine.
He did. So under his Latin name, carless Lena Monica.
He also used on all the papers he wrote in Latin later on.
He also adopted the name Carvan Lin after he became a noble,
but we're still a few decades away from that happening.
Lena's time at learned was brief after just a year,
he transferred to ups university because he believed they had a better botany
course, as it turns out, the exact opposite was true. The course was quite poor,
but this actually worked in Carl's favor in just a short while he became one of
the most knowledgeable people on botany in the entire university,
teachers included in his set India.
He wrote a paper on the reproduction of plants called pre Ludia sponsor.
Plantarum it impressed one of the medical professors,
Ola Rudberg to the points where he considered that linears should be teaching
botany, not studying it. And so it was that just 23 years of age,
carinas became a lecturer at one of the countries, Lee eating universities.
It was during these early years of teaching that Cal airs began growing
dissatisfied with the current system of plant classification and started
thinking of ways to improve it. He also wrote several manuscripts,
which would later become the groundwork for some of his most important work,
such as critical Botanica. And Lanar however,
getting them published required either having money or a reputation.
And so at that point in time, Lyne had neither.
So we waited for a more opportune time in 1732,
the Royal society of sciences,
Inana funded a research expedition for Aire to allow app lands the most
Northern province of the country. By the way,
this shouldn't be confused with the region of the same name today found in
Finlands, which did not exist.
Back then as the whole of Lapland was still part of the Swedish realm.
The main goal of the expedition was to collect and document as many plants and
animals as possible. In the hopes of finding new species,
the trip would vomited a similar journey made by R back a few decades prior.
Unfortunately for him, he had lost all the extensive notes in a fire.
The air set off on may, the 12th, 1732 shortly before his 25th birthday.
It took him almost half a year to make the 1,250 mile journey,
which he traveled on foot. And by horse, even though lap lands was not,
are considered a particularly biodiverse region.
The young botanist still managed to find and collect around a hundred new plant
species. His discoveries forms the basis for one of his most important books.
The floral Ponca published in 1737 in Amsterdam.
There was an account of all the plants that Lynes encountered during his trip
describing over 500 species in D detail.
The information in the book was significant,
but what truly made it noteworthy was the fact that EZ put into practice for the
first time, his new binomial nomenclature system,
which had made him famous and is still in use in taxonomy today.
Binomial nomenclature simply means a two term naming system with this method.
Most species on the planet can be named using only two words.
They are usually in Latin though. It has become common to use modern words,
usually the names of people or places,
and simply adapt them to the Latin grammatical form. The first words,
the generic name designates the genus of the species,
the genus being a higher category into which similar organisms can be grouped.
The second term is the specific name,
which is used to identify only that species.
The methods was not only easy and practical,
but it brought some much needed order to an area that was ruled by chaos.
Taxonomy had been practiced since ancient times.
BARR was one of the first to classify animals by shared attributes.
The science continued during medieval times and the Renaissance,
but it was incredibly confusing.
Since many scientists like to use long descriptive terms to name species,
there was also no international body to officially establish the name of
species.
So it was entirely possible for the same organism to be described multiple books
under different names. The common Bri rose is a good example of this problem.
In ER's time, he founded onto two different names.
One of them was Rosa SVEs in Adora SU Canino and the other was Rosa
Sylvestre, Alba rib folio GL.
Besides the fact that both refer to the same plant,
neither name is particularly easy to remember or say using Lanier's method.
It simply became known as Rosa kina to give proper credit where it's due.
Linaire was not the first one to use two words to name and classify plants,
a Swiss bots named gas, barred Boin did it a hundred years before him,
indeed Aire was aware of his work and even retains many names originally devised
by bohi. However,
the Swiss modernist never developed his idea into a system which he implemented
universally Boin simply liked using as few words as possible while still
ensuring that they were descriptive enough to identify a species.
Sometimes two words were enough, but in other cases,
he would use three or four or however many.
He just felt were necessary using the line in system.
The specific name did not have to describe the species.
Oftentimes it was named after a person or a place,
which meant that one word was enough to act as a unique identifier Lenas would
go on to further improve and refine his system as did scientists who came after
him. But this, it was good enough for now
While writing floral Lea Lynes continued to teach courses at the university in
Al technically though he was still a student and eventually he concluded that it
might be time to actually graduate. Of course, by this time,
given his knowledge and experience graduation was just a formality one,
which he wants to get on with as far as possible. Therefore in 1735,
he switched universities again.
This time he traveled to the university of Hardwick in the Netherlands,
as it had a reputation of awarding degrees quickly,
one of the honest experiences of his life occurred on his way to the university.
He stomp off in Hamburg, where he met a guest of the Bergham Meister,
who was their equivalent of a mayor.
The official wanted to show off an rare and valuable curiosity,
which he had in his collection. It was a stuffed Hydra. Admittedly,
it had been killed hundreds of years prior and diluted from a church since it
came to be in the possession of the mayor.
The Hamburg Hydra had stirred quite a bit of interest in Europe and the local
politician was simply waiting for the end of a bidding war to see who offered
the highest price for it. The NAS was not impressed with the oddity.
He clearly saw it for what it was a fake made by gluing together,
different animal parts and covering them in snake scales. However,
he wasn't exactly tactful or diplomatic. It is debunking of the Hamburg Hydra.
He made his observations public immediately.
Also suggesting that since it came from a church,
it was most likely done to resemble the biblical beast rather than the Hydra
from Greek mythology. Unsurprisingly,
the value of the stuffed creature went down the toilet and the mayor of Hamburg
found that he could no longer sell it for a large sum of money feeling that he
was no longer welcome.
Leonard took his leave and made a swift getaway to Hamburg.
The Swedish bar has derived in heart and got his diploma.
He knew that he could graduate fast, but not even.
He expected things to go as smoothly as they did.
Len had already written a paper on the causes of malaria,
which he submitted as his doctoral thesis.
It was called inaugural thesis in medicine,
in which a new hypothesis us on the cause of intermittent fevers is presented by
the favor of God,
three times the best and the greatest submitted by Karl Lena from small
and Sweden, a Radian scholar in it, the Swedish scientist got some things right,
and some things wrong Linea Aines that a common type of wormwood called Artesia
Anur would work as a remedy against malaria.
This was 240 years before Chinese research at two UU actually
extracted a compound called art medicine from the plants and used it to
successfully make antier drugs. However,
he incorrectly concluded that malaria was caused by very small clay particles
because all the regions with high instances of the illness had soil rich and
clay either way. The university was sufficiently impressed with the thesis.
And within two weeks, Carl Lenas became a doctor of medicine.
Also around this time in the Netherlands, Lenas added another impressive,
but unusual accolade to his resume.
He became the first man to successfully grow a banana in Europe. Back then,
this was a grand ambition of botanists.
Many of them managed to get the banana plant to start growing,
but none could make it flour, let alone produce its delicious fruit.
This was because the plant preferred a hotter and wetter climate than what
Europe could provide. Linaire didn't exactly figure this out right off the bat,
but he adopted a scientific and methodical approach to the problem.
He knew that through trial and error,
he could achieve conditions which would help the Bon banana grow.
Eventually he gave the plants enough,
extra heat and water to mimic its natural tropical climate.
And he was rewarded with a flowering plant full of tasty banana fruit,
which from a botanical perspective is actually technically a buried during his
experiments line,
wrote down extensive notes and observations and until later published them.
So there's anyone with even a modicum of horticultural skin.
I could also recreate the conditions and grow their own bananas later on.
He continued his studies and came up with multiple medical applications for the
fruit, such as treating coughs, eye inflammations and bladder problems. Bizarre.
He also became convinced that the banana was the forbidden fruit found in the
garden of Eden, which was eaten by Adam and Eve.
So you might not be discovering biblical fruits,
but if you'd like to learn more about science while brilliant is the way to do
it,
brilliant is a problem solving based website and app with a hands on approach.
They've got over 60 interactive courses in maths science and computer science.
Now you've probably heard me talk about brilliant and what they really do is
beyond teaching you the kind of maths and science and computer science.
They really teach you problem solving skills, which are practical.
Even if you don't pursue any of these sciences,
learning how to break down complex problems.
Do that component parts is kind of critical in whichever career path you chooses
or maybe you've wanted to learn programming,
but you've always been a bit daunted by as well.
Normally it requires you on the tedious details of a specific programming
language,
but really the bedrock of it is an understanding of the fundamental algorithms
on brilliant. You start by programming a drone with simple instructions,
and this teaches you the basic structure of every program that you'll ever
write. It's all drag and drop exercises,
which will get you thinking like a computer scientist in no time.
And that's just one example there.
Load of great stuff on that platform look brilliant is a great compliments
watching educational videos like this one it'll really help you master even
complex technical subjects.
So if you want to support biographics and get it unlimited access to all of
brilliance, indepth, maths, and science courses, please head over to
brilliant.org/biographics and you'll get 20% off that annual premium
subscription. And let's get back to it
In the Netherlands line,
met and befriended several people who would play an important role in his
career. One of them was a Dutch bots named ya Frederick Gros.
He saw one of line's manuscripts where the sweet scientist used his new binomial
nomenclature and realized that it had the potential to revolutionize botany.
Grono encouraged Linaire to write and publish his ideas.
Not only that he helped him do it by financing his work and convincing a friend
of his Scottish doctor named Isaac Lawson to do the same Lyne,
always intended to publish his works.
It was just a matter of securing the money to do it.
This new arrangement was just a match made in heaven.
And so in 1735 COE published arguably his most important work,
the system in Naura or the system of nature.
It was a book on taxonomy highlighting his ideas on the hierarchy of all the
organisms in the world, which of course used his own naming system.
This book became a constant presence in ly NE's life.
As he always kept revising and adding to it over the course of 30 years,
he published 12 different editions of the book going from Amir 12 pages in his
first edition to more than 2,400 pages for the last,
it was the first attempt to name all the known organisms in the world.
It was ambitious, but perhaps two ambitious at firstly,
a believed that there could be hardly more than 10,000 species in the world.
He eventually changed his tune when he realized that he could name around 7,700
flowering plants alone,
besides simply adding more species to the ever-growing list.
EZ also improved the hierarchy.
His taxonomic system had five levels from highest to lowest.
It included kingdom class order, genus and species.
He considered gen and species to be natural God-given categories.
While the other three were human constructs developed to make classification
easier.
The NAS believed that all organisms in the world fell into one of three
kingdoms, animals, plants,
and minerals by the 10th edition of the systemic Artur,
which is regarded by many as the definitive version.
Lenas had divided the animal kingdom into six classes,
which are mostly still recognizable today.
They are mammalia which includes mammals AVEs comprised of birds.
Amphibia containing amphibians and rep PIs comprising,
bony fish in sector, which contained all arthropods and finally vers,
which included all the invertebrates without exoskeletons and segmented bodies
like worms and mosques plants were grouped into 24 classes. Now we,
I going to go into detail for each one,
but linear stress that his classifications were done purely for identification
purposes. He did not regard them as natural groups, that kind of classification.
He reserved for another book of his,
the philia Botanica published in 1751 for the
categorizations in the sustainment Artura line, relied on sexual reproduction,
a group plant, mostly going by the number of statement, niche, plant hat.
The statement by the way is the male fertilizing parts of the flower.
The bit that produces pollen, the female organ,
the one with the seed is called the pistol line's classification was quite
basic. The class of flowers with one statement was called men Andria.
The class with two statements was di Andria.
The one with three was tri Andria and well. So on,
there were exceptions of course, such as crypto Gaia,
which included all Thurs fungi and Algee Len's mineral division was
far more basic and has fallen completely out of use.
He grouped them into just three classes.
Petre for rocks mineraly for minerals and facia for fossils and sediments.
Of course,
taxonomy has advanced since the days of ness there aren't just five main
taxonomic ranks anymore. For example, there are eight, but even in his own,
in time,
the scientist seemed always willing to admit his mistakes and make changes,
which is one of the main reasons why this ISTE Naura has so many additions in
the first books. He classified whales as Phish. For example,
even the thing that made him famous by nom nomenclature Aire submitted that
sometimes it was not enough.
So he all introduced trinomial or Tris the dog. For example,
he considered a subspecies of the wool for Canus lupus.
Therefore the domestic dog needed a sub specific name to distinguish it.
So he named it Canus lupus familiars a more well known example is the
Plains bison subspecies of the American bison.
Also known as the Buffalo because the genus and subspecies all had the word
bison in them. Lynes gave them the scientific name of bison, bison bison.
A similar example is the Western lowland gorilla who has the Ryman gorilla
gorilla gorilla.
But that one wasn't named by the NAS one final interesting little tidbit from
the URA concerns,
the common simples war or to give it its Lyne name cigs be
Orta Lyne ran into conflict with Johan cigs back an academic who considered the
modernist idea of sexual reproduction to classify plants as loathsome hollow,
because God would never have allowed such D and behavior referring here to all
plants that had more than one male and one female reproductive organ as revenge,
Lenas named the small and ugly weed after him
During his time spent in the Netherlands.
Lenas also made the acquaintance of George cliff at thei arch banker,
who as one of the directors of the Dutch east India company was one of the
wealthiest men in the country. More than that though, Clifford,
she Aire passion for botany. He owned a large estate called heart cap,
which was famous for its massive gardens.
Clifford Toon Aire says his personal physician.
The Swedish doctor was provided with a generous salary, free room and board.
And of course, acts nest to one of the most diverse gardens in Europe.
His work was not particularly taxing.
So Lyne spent most of his time indulging in his botanical interests.
He even wrote a book called Jes cliff Tianas describing over 1,200 plant species
that were found in Harter camp.
There's actually a pretty funny story of Halle came to work for Clifford.
Prior to that,
he was employed by a fellow botanist named Johanas Berman who also allowed Lyne
to stay with him. When Clifford made his offer,
the Swedish scientist was reluctant to accept as he already promised Berman to
stay with him for the winter.
His part Berman was keen to keep his prize assistant.
Cliffords had tempting with a red book from his collection and he persuaded
Berman to trade Aire for the book during his time with Clifford Lyne also made
trips to France and England there.
He befriended other notable botanists and exchanged ideas, but more importantly,
he also showed them his new naming system,
which many of them adopted over the following years in 1738,
Linaire finally returned to Sweden. He married a woman named Sarah Elizabeth,
Maria, and they had seven children together.
He then moved to Stockholm where he found work as a physician while there
Linaire also founded the Royal Swedish academy of science and became its first
president. His stint in Stockholm was short. As three years later,
he moved to Abala where he became professor of botany in medicine at the
university that he once tended. He was still young at this time,
only in his mid thirties, but he'd already settled into a nice groove,
which he maintained for the rest of his life.
He continued teaching and some more importantly writing by the end of his
career, the nurse had published over 30 books,
not counting the different editions of sustain and NA in 1750,
he became the rector of Al university.
The nurse regularly took his students and botanical expeditions through the most
remote parts of Sweden often that the government's expense,
his most prized peoples became known as the apostles of Lynas because they went
on expeditions throughout the entire world to spread his teachings as well as
collect rare samples to bring back to the university.
Carl Peter Thunberg traveled to Japan. For example,
while Peter calm was the one who visited north America,
perhaps his most notable apostle was Daniel Soer who accompanied James Cook on
his first journey to Australia for his work.
Lyne was Knight in 1761 by king AOL Frederick.
Since then he took on the name CARV onlin. In his later years,
he found up solo who crowded and noisy.
So he purchased an estate called Hammarby in the nearby countryside.
Eventually he had to resign as university ragged at you to his failing health.
He suffered three strokes in five years and the last one finally killed him on
January the 10th, 1778, age 70, his vast collections,
which included tens of thousands of plants and insects.
Plus thousands of books and letters were left to his family who later sold it to
a young English botanist named James Edward Smith upon his written and London,
the wealthy scientist foundered, the linen society,
helping to ensure that the name linears will always be an ex linked
to the world of natural history and taxonomy.
So I really hope you enjoyed that video.
Please do hit that thumbs up button below and don't forget to subscribe brand
new videos just like this couple of times a week.
Also please do check out our fantastic sponsor. Brilliant.
They're linked to below and thank you for watching.